[Doc Rework] - `Differences regarding the original NGSIv2 spec` Section PR4 (#4183)
telefonicaid/fiware-orion: doc/manuals/orion-api.md

This section contains the topics that, due to implementation decision, the behaviour is differs from the described in the 
original NGSIv2 specification.

## `actionType` metadata

From original NGSIv2 specification section "Builtin metadata", regarding `actionType` metadata:

> Its value depend on the request operation type: `update` for updates,
> `append` for creation and `delete` for deletion. Its type is always `Text`.

Current Orion implementation supports `update` and `append`. The `delete` case will be

> supported upon completion of [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/1494).

Author: It seems it is already completed

Reviewer: I think was a wrong number. See further comment.

NTC

Current Orion implementation supports `update` and `append`. The `delete` case will be
supported upon completion of [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/1494).

> ## Ambiguous subscription status `failed` not used

Author: A future task would need to review subscription payloads examples that include `status` with `failed` value

Reviewer: Noted in https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/pull/4141

The current Orion implementation doesn't support `keyValues` option in `POST /v2/op/notify` operation described in the 
original NGSIv2 specification. If you attempt to use it you would get a 400 Bad Request error.

> ## Registration implementation differences

Author: This new section was created for describing all the differences between Orion and the spec for registrations.

Reviewer: Ok. NTC

| [`subject`](#subscriptionsubject)   |          | object | An object that describes the subject of the subscription.                 |
| [`notification`](#subscriptionnotification) |          | object | An object that describes the notification to send when the subscription is triggered.         |
| `expires`      | ✓        | ISO8601 | Subscription expiration date in ISO8601 format. Permanent subscriptions must omit this field. |

> | `status`       |          | string | Either `active` (for active subscriptions) or `inactive` (for inactive subscriptions). If this field is not provided at subscription creation time, new subscriptions are created with the `active` status, which can be changed by clients afterwards. For expired subscriptions, this attribute is set to `expired` (no matter if the client updates it to `active`/`inactive`). Also, for subscriptions experiencing problems with notifications, the status is set to `failed`. As soon as the notifications start working again, the status is changed back to `active`. Additionaly, `oneshot` value is available, firing the notification only once whenever the entity is updated after creating the subscription. Once a notification is triggered, the subscription transitions to "status": "inactive". |

Author: Pay attention to this

| `description`           | ✓        | string | Description given to this registration.                                                                                                                                                     |
| [`provider`](#registrationprovider)              |          | object | Object that describes the context source registered.                                                                                                                                        |
| [`dataProvided`](#registrationdataprovided)          |          | object | Object that describes the data provided by this source.                                                                                                                                     |

> | `status`       | ✓        | string | Enumerated field which captures the current status of this registration with the possibles values: [`active`, `inactive`, `expired` or `failed`]. If this field is not provided at registration creation time, new registrations are created with the `active` status, which may be changed by clients afterwards. For expired registrations, this attribute is set to `expired` (no matter if the client updates it to `active`/`inactive`). Also, for registrations experiencing problems with forwarding operations, the status is set to `failed`. As soon as the forwarding operations start working again, the status is changed back to `active`. |

Author: Pay attention to this

Reviewer: Let's double check that active, inactive and expired are really working. Not fully sure...

Reviewer: I have realized we say in the differences section:

> The `inactive` value for `status` is not supported

But nothing is told about the `failed` status.

Definitively, we should check how Orion works in this sense to precisely describe the status it supports (and how) for registrations in this document.

| [`subject`](#subscriptionsubject)   |          | object | An object that describes the subject of the subscription.                 |
| [`notification`](#subscriptionnotification) |          | object | An object that describes the notification to send when the subscription is triggered.         |
| `expires`      | ✓        | ISO8601 | Subscription expiration date in ISO8601 format. Permanent subscriptions must omit this field. |

> | `status`       |          | string | Either `active` (for active subscriptions) or `inactive` (for inactive subscriptions). If this field is not provided at subscription creation time, new subscriptions are created with the `active` status, which can be changed by clients afterwards. For expired subscriptions, this attribute is set to `expired` (no matter if the client updates it to `active`/`inactive`). Additionaly, `oneshot` value is available, firing the notification only once whenever the entity is updated after creating the subscription. Once a notification is triggered, the subscription transitions to "status": "inactive". |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `status`       |          | string | Either `active` (for active subscriptions) or `inactive` (for inactive subscriptions). If this field is not provided at subscription creation time, new subscriptions are created with the `active` status, which can be changed by clients afterwards. For expired subscriptions, this attribute is set to `expired` (no matter if the client updates it to `active`/`inactive`). Additionaly, `oneshot` value is available, firing the notification only once whenever the entity is updated after creating the subscription. Once a notification is triggered, the subscription transitions to "status": "inactive". More detail on oneshot subscriptions in the [corresponding section](#oneshot-subscription).|
```

## Registration Operations

A Context Registration allows to bind external context information sources so that they can
play the role of providers of certain subsets (entities, attributes) of the context information space, including those located
at specific geographical areas. The way in which Orion implements such forwarding is as follows:

> * `POST /v2/op/query` for query forwarding
> * `POST /v2/op/update` for update forwarding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [`POST /v2/op/query`](#query-post-v2opquery) for query forwarding
* [`POST /v2/op/update`](#update-post-v2opupdate) for update forwarding
```

## Registration Operations

A Context Registration allows to bind external context information sources so that they can
play the role of providers of certain subsets (entities, attributes) of the context information space, including those located
at specific geographical areas. The way in which Orion implements such forwarding is as follows:

* `POST /v2/op/query` for query forwarding
* `POST /v2/op/update` for update forwarding

More information on forwarding to context information sources can be found in [this specific document](user/context_providers.md).

> Orion implements an additional field `legacyForwarding` (within `provider`) not included in the NGSIv2
> specification. If the value of `legacyForwarding` is `true` then NGSIv1-based query/update will be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orion implements an additional field `legacyForwarding` (within [`provider`](#registrationdataprovided)). If the value of `legacyForwarding` is `true` then NGSIv1-based query/update will be used
```

| `description`           | ✓        | string | Description given to this registration.                                                                                                                                                     |
| [`provider`](#registrationprovider)              |          | object | Object that describes the context source registered.                                                                                                                                        |
| [`dataProvided`](#registrationdataprovided)          |          | object | Object that describes the data provided by this source.                                                                                                                                     |

> | `status`       | ✓        | string | Enumerated field which captures the current status of this registration with the possibles values: [`active`, `inactive`or `expired`]. If this field is not provided at registration creation time, new registrations are created with the `active` status, which may be changed by clients afterwards. For expired registrations, this attribute is set to `expired` (no matter if the client updates it to `active`/`inactive`). Also, for registrations experiencing problems with forwarding operations, the status is set to `failed`. As soon as the forwarding operations start working again, the status is changed back to `active`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `status`       | ✓        | string | Always `active` in the current implementation. |
```

| `description`           | ✓        | string | Description given to this registration.                                                                                                                                                     |
| [`provider`](#registrationprovider)              |          | object | Object that describes the context source registered.                                                                                                                                        |
| [`dataProvided`](#registrationdataprovided)          |          | object | Object that describes the data provided by this source.                                                                                                                                     |

> | `status`       | ✓        | string | Enumerated field which captures the current status of this registration with the possibles values: [`active`, `inactive`or `expired`]. If this field is not provided at registration creation time, new registrations are created with the `active` status, which may be changed by clients afterwards. For expired registrations, this attribute is set to `expired` (no matter if the client updates it to `active`/`inactive`). Also, for registrations experiencing problems with forwarding operations, the status is set to `failed`. As soon as the forwarding operations start working again, the status is changed back to `active`. Due to implementation reasons, `inactive` status is not supported. See more infomration in [Registration implementation differences](#registration-implementation-differences) section |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `status`       | ✓        | string | Enumerated field which captures the current status of this registration with the possibles values: [`active`, `inactive`or `expired`]. If this field is not provided at registration creation time, new registrations are created with the `active` status, which may be changed by clients afterwards. For expired registrations, this attribute is set to `expired` (no matter if the client updates it to `active`/`inactive`). Also, for registrations experiencing problems with forwarding operations, the status is set to `failed`. As soon as the forwarding operations start working again, the status is changed back to `active`. |
```

I think is better the API description doesn include "noise" about differences with original NGSIv2 spec. That differences are already detailed in the corresponding section.

|----------------|----------|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `http`         |          | object | It is used to convey parameters for providers that deliver information through the HTTP protocol.(Only protocol supported nowadays). <br>It must contain a subfield named `url` with the URL that serves as the endpoint that offers the providing interface. The endpoint must *not* include the protocol specific part (for instance `/v2/entities`). |
| `supportedForwardingMode`  |          | string | It is used to convey the forwarding mode supported by this context provider. By default `all`. Allowed values are: <ul><li><code>none</code>: This provider does not support request forwarding.</li><li><code>query</code>: This provider only supports request forwarding to query data.</li><li><code>update</code>: This provider only supports request forwarding to update data.</li><li><code>all</code>: This provider supports both query and update forwarding requests. (Default value).</li></ul> |

> |`legacyForwarding`| ✓      | boolean | If `true`, a NGSIv1-based query/update will be used for forwarding the requests of the registration. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`legacyForwarding`| ✓      | boolean | If `true`, a NGSIv1-based query/update will be used for forwarding the requests of the registration. Default (if not included) is `false`. |
```

#### `registration.dataProvided`

The `dataProvided` field contains the following subfields:

| Parameter      | Optional | Type   | Description                                                                                   |
|----------------|----------|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `entities`     |          | array | A list of objects, each one composed of the following subfields: <ul><li><code>id</code> or <code>idPattern</code>: d or pattern of the affected entities (only `.*` expression supported at this time(see this [section](#registration-implementation-differences))). Both cannot be used at the same time, but one of them must be present.</li><li><code>type</code> Type of the affected entities. If omitted, it means "any entity type".</li></ul> |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `entities`     |          | array | A list of objects, each one composed of the following subfields: <ul><li><code>id</code> or <code>idPattern</code>: id or pattern of the affected entities (only the exact expression `.*` is supported). Both cannot be used at the same time, but one of them must be present.</li><li><code>type</code> Type of the affected entities. If omitted, it means "any entity type".</li></ul> |
```

I think is better the API description doesn include "noise" about differences with original NGSIv2 spec. That differences are already detailed in the corresponding section.

| `attrs`        |          | array | List of attributes to be provided (if not specified, all attributes). |

> | `expression`   |          | object | Due to implementation reasons, this filed is ignored. See [Registration implementation differences](#registration-implementation-differences) section |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think is better the API description doesn include "noise" about differences with original NGSIv2 spec. That differences are already detailed in the corresponding section.

the subscription failed in its last notification or not (i.e. checking that `failsCounter` is greater than 0).

## `keyValues` not supported in `POST /v2/op/notify`

The current Orion implementation doesn't support `keyValues` option in `POST /v2/op/notify` operation described in the 
original NGSIv2 specification. If you attempt to use it you would get a 400 Bad Request error.

## Registration implementation differences

Orion implements registration management as described in the NGSIv2 specification, except
for the following aspects:

* `PATCH /v2/registration/<id>` is not implemented. Thus, registrations cannot be updated
  directly. I.e., updates must be done deleting and re-creating the registration. Please
  see [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3007) about this.
* `idPattern` is supported but only for the exact regular expression `.*`
* `typePattern` is not implemented.
* The `expression` field (within `dataProvided`) is not supported. The field is simply
  ignored. Please see [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3107) about it.

> * The `inactive` value for `status` is not supported. I.e., the field is stored/retrieved correctly,
>   but the registration is always active, even when the value is `inactive`. Please see
>   [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3108) about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `inactive` value for `status` is not supported. I.e., the field is stored/retrieved correctly,
  but the registration is always active, even when the value is `inactive`. Please see
  [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3108) about it.
* The `expired` value for `status` is not supported. The status is shows as `active` even in the
   registration is actually expired.
```

* Successful operation uses 200 OK
* Errors use a non-2xx and (optionally) an error payload. See subsection on [Error Responses](#error-responses) for
  more details.

# Differences regarding the original NGSIv2 spec

This section contains the topics that, due to implementation decision, differs from the described in [the 

> original NGSIv2 specification](http://telefonicaid.github.io/fiware-orion/api/v2/stable/). These differences comes after years of experience with NGSIv2, in two senses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
original NGSIv2 specification](http://telefonicaid.github.io/fiware-orion/api/v2/stable/). These differences come after years of experience with NGSIv2, in two senses:
```

* Some functionally originally included in NGSIv2 has resulted not to be really useful or needed in real world scenarios. Thus, Orion doesn't implement it. For instance, update registrations operation

> * NGSIv2 has some flaws not detected at specification time. For instance, the way in which `status` subscription field was designed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* NGSIv2 has some flaws not detected at specification time. For instance, the way in which `failed` subscription status was designed.
```

* Successful operation uses 200 OK
* Errors use a non-2xx and (optionally) an error payload. See subsection on [Error Responses](#error-responses) for
  more details.

# Differences regarding the original NGSIv2 spec

> This section contains the topics that, due to implementation decision, the behaviour is differs from the described in the 
> original NGSIv2 specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section contains the topics that, due to implementation decision, differs from the described in the 
original NGSIv2 specification. These differences comes after years of experience with NGSIv2, in two senses:

* Some functionally originally included in NGSIv2 has resulted not to be really useful or needed in real world scenarios. Thus, Orion doesn't implement it. For instance, update registrations operation
* NGSIv2 has some flaws not detected at specification time. For instance, the way in which `status` subscription field was designed.
```

## `actionType` metadata

From original NGSIv2 specification section "Builtin metadata", regarding `actionType` metadata:

> Its value depend on the request operation type: `update` for updates,
> `append` for creation and `delete` for deletion. Its type is always `Text`.

Current Orion implementation supports `update` and `append`. The `delete` case will be

> supported upon completion of [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/1494).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
supported upon completion of [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/2591).
```

I have had a look and it seems the right issue is that one. Please, check.

## `keyValues` not supported in `POST /v2/op/notify`

The current Orion implementation doesn't support `keyValues` option in `POST /v2/op/notify` operation described in the 
original NGSIv2 specification. If you attempt to use it you would get a 400 Bad Request error.

## Registration implementation differences

Orion implements registration management as described in the NGSIv2 specification, except
for the following aspects:

* `PATCH /v2/registration/<id>` is not implemented. Thus, registrations cannot be updated
  directly. I.e., updates must be done deleting and re-creating the registration. Please
  see [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3007) about this.
* `idPattern` is supported but only for the exact regular expression `.*`
* `typePattern` is not implemented.
* The `expression` field (within `dataProvided`) is not supported. The field is simply
  ignored. Please see [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3107) about it.
* The `inactive` value for `status` is not supported. I.e., the field is stored/retrieved correctly,
  but the registration is always active, even when the value is `inactive`. Please see

>   [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3108) about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [this issue](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion/issues/3108) about it.
* `legacyForwarding` field (within `provider`) to support forwarding in NGSIv1-based query/update format for legacy Context Providers 
```
